---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: LORD
date: 2020-10-23T06:46:35.705Z
image: /img/uploads/shoulderboulder.jpg
contributor:
  - Joann Renee Boswell
artist:
  - Nat Iwata
tags:
  - Poetry
  - Guest
category: Article
---
with every utterance

of that word p i e r c i n g

my ears, sharp and heavy,

I must physically heave

shoulders U P under *that* weight



balanced there, pause— i n h a l e ,

hold *him* uncomfortable,

unwieldy — unconscious to all

else while *he* rousts, bloody

bluebird failing at innocence



suffer its history: s t r u t t i n g

neglect, improper ordering of human

dignity and decaying other-deprecation,

seek any Light remaining in this language…

finding none, finally e x h a l e —



throw back shoulder boulder

let it r o l l down my back.

as this is Sunday morning,

\    brace for the next wave.

hope to hear some Good between



it is not this way for all,

some let it f l u t t e r overhead

or welcome the crashing wash

as this title crafts their countenance,

\    they revel in the alteration



I do not *have* to s t a y ,

but perhaps I am stronger

through this particular practice,

power in mindful non-participation

character chiseled by discomfort



As I have gotten older, I've progressed further from the language of my childhood. Choosing words that better suit my understanding and hopes of theology. I am doing what I can to heal my relationship with the Divine by refusing to use male pronouns. I sometimes use female language, or gender neutral language. But I most prefer to use words that speak to positivity, and create a whole new canvas for God / Godde. Words like Light and Hope. As I do this work for myself, I become more triggered when old, thoughtless language appears at church services and other places. This happens most often during the music portion at church services, and while other people are praying out loud. A word that continues to stick out to me is "Lord". This word is not only a male word, but it also implies a hierarchy that comes out of slavery and serfdom. It places the hearer as a servant, a slave, a worthless creature. My Quaker faith speaks of human dignity, of our inherent worth. So I wince every time the word "Lord" shows up on Sunday mornings, typically during the singing portion. If you sit next to me you might hear me sing "Love" as a replacement word.