---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Niddah
date: 2020-09-28T07:44:59.933Z
image: /img/uploads/art_niddah.jpg
contributor:
  - Erin Iwata
artist:
  - Ilona Wilson
tags:
  - gender
  - culture
  - bible
category: Poetry
---
*\*Niddah is the Jewish law surrounding female menstruation.*

Strong- assured\
masculine even,\
chiseled rigor of motherhood,\
capable, master expertise\
I march in logical,\
confident,\
until\
bloody Monday\
reminds me;\
creeping like\
a northern leg\
cramp.\
Contractions\
weaker cousin,\
ball bearings\
hanging low\
and heavy\
until the dam breaks,\
kegels grasping\
weakly for cotton\
soaking red\
in her own\
God-damned\
time.

Bloody Monday\
reminding me\
I am sick\
in some way.\
Giving up\
on my lists,\
productivity\
halted by the welling\
emotions,\
the untenable headache.\
The cracked egg\
opened and slowly\
dribbling yoke\
all over everything.

I am woman, watch me bleed.

If separate tents granted me spa silence,\
meditative journaling,\
self-reflective\
daily dips in the dead sea\
Sign&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;me&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;up.\
Every month like clockwork.\
This isn’t Godly misogyny;\
this was Divine femininity.\
Built-in reprieve from the need\
to wipe everyone else’s asses;

to tend to your own bloody hole.

Reprise the ancient art of menstruation.\
Exalt this Woman’s Club to its proper status.

Because I know I will miss it\
when it dries up inside of me;\
fertility fleeing like the last\
animals from a forest fire.

Can I savor the reason\
I ditch my dishes for chocolate\
and oversized sweatpants?\
Can I joyfully blame\
the ridiculous things I say\
in pre-catamenial fever,\
unabashedly brush it off\
“Girls will be girls you know.”\
Everyone cat laughs with pride\
and acceptance. Knowing nods\
relegating the baffled boys\
to their place\
outside&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;tent.
