---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Spark
date: 2021-11-17T16:21:55.827Z
image: /img/uploads/nillas.jpg
contributor:
  - Joann Renee Boswell
artist:
  - Nat Iwata
tags:
  - testimony
  - community
  - family
category: Poetry
short_description: "Joann Renee Boswell shares a poem reflecting on growing up
  in a small town American church. "
---
The last decade or so I spent a lot of time critiquing my spirtual formation. I've written dozens of poems tearing down theology that I used to believe, but now I find to be dangerously flawed. It has been very important work for me. And because of this work, I've found that I'm ready to explpre which parts of my spirtual formation have remained with me in a deeply postive way.  I loved my childhood, and I love who I am, and who I am growing to be. I feel true graditude for everyone and everything that's shaped and supported me. Including, it turns out, small town American conservative Chritstianity. 

\---------------------------------------------------------------------

# Spark

before I've even begun, I know\
this poem will drift into cliches

the magesty of fthe mystical\
is vague by nature

elusive buttercup caught on the breeze\
hint of yellow pulling my peripheral

that divine lemon flash\
all around and never fully digested

this is a thank you\
to small town Christianity

training wheel structure\
teaching basic appreciation for the soul

ghostly goddess, so shy\
had to learn all the rules

oh the game! endless hide\
and seek! such simple guidelines to start:

the answer's always "Jesus"!\
my love for humanity began there

tender golden sprout sneaking toward Light\
learning songs and compassion

we all thought I was daffodil\
honey-sweet, simply following

sun-patterns, etched sky laws\
-but I am Lightening

startling champagne promise\
we're all so much more

free once we know\
which restrictions to break-

no child is meant to crawl forever\
clapping merrily along to the service 

so, again, thank you Sunday School\
for the gilded maze and Nilla wafers

my spirited flight\
launched in your snug walls